.TH CE 1 "1991 March 16" CWRU
.SH NAME
ce - Chet's Emacs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ce
[-r] [-b name] [+n] [files]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ce
is Chet's Emacs.  It is a customizable, self-documenting, real-time
display editor similar to the GNU version of EMACS written by
Richard Stallman.
.B ce
is very similar to GNU EMACS, but there are some differences, and
one should not rely on complete compatibility.
.SH OPTIONS
.B ce
interprets the following flags when invoked:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B \-r
Cause the buffer containing the file designated by the following
argument to be placed in View (read-only) mode
.TP
.BI \-b name
Cause the buffer containing the next file given as an argument to
be named
.I name
.TP
.BI \+n file
Start at line
.I n
in 
.I file
.PD
.SH INVOCATION
If
.B ce
is invoked with no arguments, you will be placed in an empty buffer
called *scratch*.  Otherwise, each file name supplied as an argument
is given its own buffer.  Only the first such file is read in
immediately -- the others are deferred until needed to complete some
operation.
.PP
The names of all buffers are saved in a list, and can be viewed with
the C-X C-B command (\fIshow-buffers\fP).
.SH HELP
While running
.BR ce ,
several commands are available to help the inexperienced user.  To
execute any
.B ce
command by name, type "ESC X command-name", followed by a carriage
return.  A list of all
.B ce
commands and a short explanation of each is available with the
.I show-functions
command.  The
.I help
command will bring up a help screen in a new window.
.PP
The
.I describe-bindings
command will also list each command, and the key sequence bound to it,
if any.  The list will be placed in a separate buffer and viewed in a
new window, so that it can be saved to a file and possibly printed.
To view the command bound to a particular key sequence, use
the
.I describe-key
command.
.PP
For those unfamiliar with EMACS-style editors, an interactive tutorial
is provided.  The
.I tutorial
command will run this tutorial from inside
.BR ce ;
the
.B teach-ce
shell command will run this from a user's shell.
.SH CUSTOMIZATION
.B ce
will automatically read startup commands from an initialization file
in a user's home directory, called
.BR .ceinit ,
if one is present.  Place commands as they would normally be entered
to
.B ce
into this file.
Here is a sample file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
bind-to-key ^C emacs-version
set-fill-column 78
.fi
.RE
.SH BINDINGS
The key bindings in
.B ce
can be altered to fit personal tastes.  That is, the command executed
when a key is struck can be changed to whatever you like.  To change
a binding, use the
.I bind-to-key
command.
.SH BUGS
There are almost certainly bugs in
.BR ce .
The
.I make-bug-report
command will create and switch to a new buffer in which a bug
report may be composed.  The
.I send-bug-report
command will send the contents of the current buffer to the
current
.B ce
maintainer as a bug report.
.SH AUTHOR
Chet Ramey
.br
Case Western Reserve University
.br
chet@ins.CWRU.Edu
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I ce
The \fBce\fP executable
.TP
.I teach-ce
A script that runs the interactive \fBce\fP tutorial
.TP
.I ~/.ceinit
The personal \fBce\fP initialization file
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.PD 0
.TP
\fIregexp\fP(3)
.TP
\fIemacs\fP(1)
.PD
.SH BUGS
Regular expression searches may not cross line boundaries
