.TH CE 1 "1992 August 3" CWRU
.SH NAME
xce - X11 version of Chet's Emacs
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ce
[-r] [-b name] [+n] [-d display] [-f font] [-g geometry] [-R] [files]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ce
is Chet's Emacs.  It is a customizable, self-documenting, real-time
display editor similar to the GNU version of EMACS written by
Richard Stallman.
.B ce
is very similar to GNU EMACS, but there are some differences, and
one should not rely on complete compatibility.
.SH OPTIONS
.B ce
interprets the following flags when invoked:
.PP
.PD 0
.TP 10
.B \-r
Cause the buffer containing the file designated by the following
argument to be placed in View (read-only) mode
.TP
.BI \-b name
Cause the buffer containing the next file given as an argument to
be named
.I name
.TP
.B \+n
Start at line
.I n
in the first
.I file
named as an argument
.TP
.BI \-d displayname
Start up on X11 display
.I displayname
.TP
.BI \-f fontname
Use
.I fontname
rather than the default font
.TP
.BI \-g geometry
Cause the initial
.B xce
window to be created with size and placement specified by
.I geometry
.TP
.B \-R
Cause the
.B xce
window to simulate reverse video
.PD
.SH INVOCATION
If
.B ce
is invoked with no arguments, you will be placed in an empty buffer
called *scratch*.  Otherwise, each file name supplied as an argument
is given its own buffer.  Only the first such file is read in
immediately -- the others are deferred until needed to complete some
operation.
.PP
The names of all buffers are saved in a list, and can be viewed with
the C-X C-B command (\fIshow-buffers\fP).
.SH RESOURCES
For
.B xce
the available X resources are:
.TP 8
.B font
Specifies the name of the normal font.  The  default
is ``8x13.''
.TP 8
.B geometry
Specifies the preferred size  and  position  of  the window.
.TP 8
.B charClass
Specifies comma-separated lists of character class
bindings  of  the  form [low-]high:value.  These are
used in determining which sets of characters  should
be  treated  the same when doing cut and paste.  See
the section on specifying character classes in
\fIxterm\fP(1).
.TP 8
.B multiClickTime
Specifies the maximum time in  milliseconds  between
multi-click select events.  The default is 500 milliseconds.
.TP 8
.B reverseVideo
Specifies that the
.B xce
window is to simulate reverse video (foreground color is
.BR BlackPixel ,
background color is
.BR WhitePixel ).
The default is ``false.''
.TP 8
.B foreground
Specifies the foreground color.  The default is ``black.''
.TP 8
.B background
Specifies the background color.  The default is ``white.''
.SH HELP
While running
.BR xce ,
several commands are available to help the inexperienced user.  To
execute any
.B ce
command by name, type "ESC X command-name", followed by a carriage
return.  A list of all
.B ce
commands and a short explanation of each is available with the
.I show-functions
command.  The
.I help
command will bring up a help screen in a new window.
.PP
The
.I describe-bindings
command will also list each command, and the key sequence bound to it,
if any.  The list will be placed in a separate buffer and viewed in a
new window, so that it can be saved to a file and possibly printed.
To view the command bound to a particular key sequence, use
the
.I describe-key
command.
.PP
For those unfamiliar with EMACS-style editors, an interactive tutorial
is provided.  The
.I tutorial
command will run this tutorial from inside
.BR ce ;
the
.B teach-ce
shell command will run this from a user's shell.
.SH CUSTOMIZATION
.B ce
will automatically read startup commands from an initialization file
in a user's home directory, called
.BR .ceinit ,
if one is present.  Place commands as they would normally be entered
to
.B ce
into this file.
Here is a sample file:
.PP
.RS
.nf
bind-to-key ^C emacs-version
set-fill-column 78
.fi
.RE
.SH BINDINGS
The key bindings in
.B xce
can be altered to fit personal tastes.  That is, the command executed
when a key is struck can be changed to whatever you like.  To change
a binding, use the
.I bind-to-key
command.
.SH BUGS
There are almost certainly bugs in
.BR xce .
The
.I make-bug-report
command will create and switch to a new buffer in which a bug
report may be composed.  The
.I send-bug-report
command will send the contents of the current buffer to the
current
.B xce
maintainer as a bug report.
.SH AUTHOR
Chet Ramey
.br
Case Western Reserve University
.br
chet@ins.CWRU.Edu
.SH FILES
.PD 0
.TP
.I xce
The \fBxce\fP executable
.TP
.I teach-ce
A script that runs the interactive \fBce\fP tutorial
.TP
.I ~/.ceinit
The personal \fBce\fP initialization file
.PD
.SH SEE ALSO
.PD 0
.TP
\fIregexp\fP(3)
.TP
\fIemacs\fP(1)
.TP
\fIxterm\fP(1)
.PD
.SH BUGS
Regular expression searches may not cross line boundaries
